Exercice 5
================
2022-06-01

## What is complex contagion and how it’s different from simple contagion?

Complex contagions can be defined as “behaviors, beliefs, or attitudes
for which transmission requires contact with multiple sources of
activation” \[2\], while simple contagions can be described as
“contagions for which a single activated source can be sufficient for
transmission” \[2\]. Examples of such simple contagion are infectious
diseases, such as the flu, and valuable information about weather, news
and sports for instance, where a single exposure is normally enough for
propagating effortlessly through a network. Here are a few examples of
complex contagion: social movements or social norms, such as voting,
medical behaviors, such as choosing a method of contraception, and
innovation adoption, such as implementing a new technology. Thus, all
complex information and behavioral change are likely to be considered as
complex contagion, requiring contact many sources of reinforcement in
order to be activated, transmitted, or adopted.

Centola highlights four different social mechanisms that explain why a
complex contagion might necessitate exposure to several sources of
activation, which are the following: strategic complementary,
credibility, legitimacy, and emotional contagion \[1\]. Typically, a
complex contagion incurs a cost or risk that can be either financial,
psychological, or reputational, therefore increasing the dependence of
an adopter on other people’s decision. Finally, Centola summarizes the
distinction between complex contagion and simple contagion as follows:
“multiple exposures to the same infected individual may be sufficient
for simple contagions to spread, multiple sources of exposure are needed
to diffuse complex contagions” \[1\].

## What does complex contagion mean for diffusion of behaviors in organization?

It is apparent that most collective behaviors spread through social
contact. However, some social mechanisms can generate resistance to
adoption. Indeed, behaviors do not tend to spread easily because they
usually need key components such as legitimacy, credibility, or
complementarity in order to be adopted. As mentioned above, since its
transmission requires several sources of reinforcement and usually
involved some kind of cost or risk, a complex contagion can fail to
spread behavior change when encountering resistance. Hence, it seems
that the bigger the reputational or financial cost or risk of a
decision, the more social reinforcement is needed to drive adoption.

This phenomenon can be observed in an organization when, for example,
strategies for structuring relationships and increasing collaboration
between stakeholders are developed. In real-world social networks, the
degree distribution is often unsymmetrical because some people have
excessively more ties in comparison to other people and ties are unequal
because there are often strengths or weaknesses in the network. This can
result in diffusion being less likely to diffuse because some
individuals who have less privilege or power are expected to resist
change, while other people who may benefit from change may not want to
see a familiar and well-known system of interactions be disrupted.

## How can we use the threshold models to better manage prosocial behavior in organizations, learning, and toxic or unproductive behaviors?

For a complex contagion, an individual’s “threshold” for adoption can be
defined as “the number of activated contacts required to trigger her
activation.” \[2\] In the threshold dynamics, this individual can
overcome her threshold if she obtains enough social reinforcement from
her network to incite her to adopt the new behavior. A major decision
will probably be facilitated by a significant subgroup of relationships
in her network. It all boils down to the fact that various sources of
exposure are required to diffuse complex contagions. It also appears
that thresholds naturally vary from person to person and can be
anticipated to obey normal distribution rules \[1\].

In order to better manage prosocial behaviors in organizations, it would
be important to promote social interactions and interpersonal
communication, which can be crucial in determining adoption of such
behaviors. Like this, in order to better manage learning, an
individual-level mechanism, it would be useful to organize group
sessions or gatherings for people to reinforce each other’s excitement
and shared emotional state over their learnings. Similarly, in order to
better manage toxic or unproductive behaviors, it would be crucial to
reinforce a new reputational belief (nontoxic and productive behaviors)
from to multiple sources. Indeed, reinforcement can become even more
important when thresholds are increased, and contagion is more complex.

# References

\[1\] Centola, D. (2018). How behavior spreads : the science of complex
contagions (Ser. Princeton analytical sociology series). Princeton
University Press. Retrieved June 1, 2022, from INSERT-MISSING-URL.

\[2\] Lehmann, S., & Ahn, Y.-Y. (Eds.). (2018). Complex spreading
phenomena in social systems: influence and contagion in real-world
social networks (Ser. Computational social sciences). Springer.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77332-2>
